My configuration files for home, work, etc.
I am a tiling window manager, helix/vim, and terminal-first user.

If you want to understand my decision making or how something works, feel free to open an issue.
Issues don't make sense for this type of project (it is specifically for me), so feel free to use it as a Q&A.

# Running

This is written so that you only need 1. POSIX `sh` and 2. `nix` or `curl` (to fetch `nix`). 

To use this:

1. `cd ~`
1. Clone this repo. e.g. `git clone https://github.com/yueleshia/dotfiles`. GitHub supports direct downloads.
1. Look at [./gen_environment.nix](gen_environment.nix) and [./src/profiles.ncl](src/profiles.ncl) to see which host you wish to use.
1. `dotfiles/make.sh <host>`, e.g. `dotfiles/make.sh port`
1. Look through the [dotfiles/install](install) directory for additional scripts.

If you wish to use gopass with the browser:

1. `gpg --full-generate-key`
1. transfer your public key to the old computer
1. re-encrypt your pass store on the old computer with `gopass init`
1. transfer your store to the new computer
1. `gopass-jsonapi configure` (as `firefox` for any firefox-derivative)

# How it works

Nix is the best solution for reproducibile software installation.
Flakes require absolute paths and all files to be git commited.
However, to have runtime feature detection (e.g. what username my work Windows computer that I am keeping private), I am generating files via the [./make.sh](make.sh) script.

Everything past the flake.nix is written in the [nickel](https://github.com/tweag/nickel) language rather than the nix.
The entry point for home-manager (what would be the `home.nix`) is generated by [output.ncl](src/output.ncl), which you can preview by `nickel export output.ncl`.
I do this because nix is not a very good language for data wrangling, whereas nickel is.

All files in [./src/config](src/config) that begin with '_mk_' compiled by into [./src/gen_symlinks.ncl](src/gen_symlinks.ncl) at runtime.
If they are `.ncl` nickel files, then they are nickel exported to the nix store then symlinked.
If they are not `.ncl` files, then they are symlinked directly.
Additionally, in [profiles.ncl](src/profiles.ncl), there `direct_links` and `named_directories` that are also symlinked.

File generation via `_mk_*.ncl` are typically when I wish to use [src/meta](src/meta), e.g. to share a color scheme across different programs.
Directories I specify via `direct_links` are for when I wish to populate the directory without needing to run [./make.sh](make.sh), e.g. I want my [scripts](src/.config/scripts) directory to always be populated immediately.

# Philosophy

At its core, the [./make.sh](make.sh) script is just calling `home-manager switch`.
If you are unfamiliar with nix, either [flake.nix](flake.nix) or default.nix are the entry points.

## Nix and Home-manager vs NixOS

Nix is a language.
Nix is also a package manager that both installs (like others) and configures software (unlike others) with the Nix language.
Home-manager is a framework for managing software on an existing system.
NixOS is a linux distro that is home-manager but for your entire computer from the ground up.
Home-manager pulls from its own repos to offer more user customisation.
Think user software vs system-wide software.

In the Nix world, you could approach configuration by:
1. Fully declared (NixOS only or NixOS + home-manager as a module) 
1. Two-phased (NixOS + home-manager standalone)
1. Partially declared (some other distro + home-manager standalone)
1. Stateful (using a non-nix package manager)

Stateful can be expanded and there are also many alternatives to nix, but that is out of scope for this README.

I have chosen a home-manager-first philosophy.
I often use computers that do not have NixOS.
Installing NixOS is easy (as everything is tracked by your nix project), and it is precisely non-nix-based systems that are difficult to setup (i.e. the entire purpose of nix).
Thus, I want design my setup process around making the hard problem easy.

## Software Selection Notes

* @TODO: see blog

## Specific Use-Cases Notes

* WSL
* Android (Termux)

# TODO

* Many of the shellscripts in src/scripts/* will likely become an executable once my [cmdtree](https://www.github.com/yueleshia/cmdtree) stabilises.
* Tmux and my window managers should be partially managed by [chordscript](https://www.github.com/yueleshia/chordscript)
